Calibrating the micrometer :

For more accurate measurements of the mirror movement, you can use a green (532nm) laser to
calibrate the micrometer.

Turn the micrometer knob as you count off at least 20 fringes. Carefully note the change in the
micrometer reading and record this value as d’. The actual mirror movement d = N 4/2, where

iis the known wave length of the laser and N is the number of fringes that were counted. A=d/d’
is the calibration constant for the micrometer.

Determination of wavelength of laser beam :

For finding the wavelength of laser source , we are using Red doide laser. Set the interferometer
with red laser. Note the initial position of the micrometer.

Turn the micrometer knob as you count off at least 20 fringes. Carefully note the change in the

micrometer reading and record this value as d.

The wavelength of laser is calculated by:

XK =(Q2d/N)A

where ‘d’ is the change in position that occurs for ‘N’ fringes to

pass and ‘A’ is the calibration constant of the micrometer as we found in early
experiment.

=: Refractive Index of Transparent material

Theory :

The light passes through a greater length of
glass as the plate is rotated. The change in
the path length of the light beam as the glass
plate is rotated and relates the change in path
length with the laser beam through air.

The refractive index of glass slide,

(2t - NA) (1 - cos@)

2t (1 - cos6) - NA

where t is the thickness of the glass slide, N is the number of fringes counted, 4 is the wave
length oflightused and 6 isthe angle turned for N fringes.

Procedure :

Place the glass slide holder in one of the arms of the interferometer. Attach the glass slide to
the rotation stage and make it perpendicular to the laser beam.

Note: When glass plate is introduced in the optical path of Michelson interferometer, the fringe will be
shifted & will become blur. To make the fringe sharp again, move mirror with translation to & fro till the
clear set of fringes is achieved on the viewing screen.

Hi

Note the initial position of the glass slide from the dial. Rotate slowly by counting the number of
fringes passing. Note the final reading.

The difference is the angle of rotation 0

2t (1 - cos6) - NA

Vieasurements

Least count of the rotation stage = .........0

(2t - NA) (1 - cos®)

Fringes are] tated :
g ANGIC rots Refractive index

Trial No Moved f
| (N) Left Right

Result :-

Refractive index of Glass Slid@ N= ou... cee ce cece eens eee eee eens

:: Refractive Index of Air

Theory :

When a piece of material of thickness d is
placed in one arm of the Michelson
Interferometer, the change in optical path
length is given by 2dn where n is the
difference in refractive index between the
sample and the material it replaced (usually
air). In other words, 2d (n,-n,,) / 4 extra
wavelengths are introduced if air is replaced
by asample of refractive index n,, .

Let 2% bethe wavelength of light, nthe refractive index of air at atmospheric pressure, d the length
of the air cell, P,,,,, the current atmospheric pressure and AP the pressure change. The relationship
between the pressure change AP and the number of fringe shift m,, is given by,

m,» = (2d (n-1)/) ( AP/P,,,)

Procedure :

For finding the refractive index of air, we are placing air chamber in one of the arms of the
interferometer. Fix it with thumb screws.

www.holmarc.com

Plot a graph between number of fringes and the corresponding pressure. The slope of the graph
will give the value m,,./AP. Put this value in the equation given below.

my, = (2d (n-1)/2) (AP/P,,,)

From the above equation, we can calculate the value of refractive index of air ‘n’.

\Vieasurements

21 Holmarc Opto Mechatronics Pvt. Ltd

Y A
4 Refractive index of air
AP
B Cc
|
>
Map ».4
We have,
(my, /AP ) = (2d (n-1)/ A) (1/ P,.,)

Il

Length of the pressure cell d
Wavelength of light used =
m,, /AP from graph

lI

(n-1) = (m,y/ AP) (4/2d) P,,,,

Substituting the values we can calculate refractive index of air.

Result:-

Refractive index of air Mo = kee ceeceeeeeeeeeee eee

